# [Homework 1.10](https://github.com/hendraanggrian/IIT-CS425/blob/assets/assignments/hw10.pdf): Advanced database concepts

> Write short notes on the following database concepts and explain how you
  would apply them to your class project? (5 pts each)
>
> 1. Indexing
> 2. Sharding
> 3. Query optimization
> 4. Concurrent transactions
> 5. Hashing
> 6. Hadoop Distributed File System

## Indexing

Database indexing is a storage caching mechanism that has been the standard of
RDMS. There is no standardization of indexing between database providers,
therefore the implementation may differ between database systems. But
essentially, they yield faster time complexity at the cost of extra space.
Database maintainers are encouraged to index only the most used properties of
their designs, but not to worry about primary keys as they are indexed by
default.

**How would it relate to CTA**: Indexing should be applied to the most searched
attributes that are non-primary keys like `address` and `zip_code`. In this
scenario, the primary keys would be `track_color` and `station_name`.

## Sharding

At some point as database size and complexity grow, maintaining all its content
in one place becomes tedious as it negatively affects performance and
reliability. Database sharding solves this scalability issue by partitioning
into lesser pieces and redeploying them into separate networks. In the field of
distributed systems, these interconnected pieces are called shards, hence the
term sharding. This practice is particularly useful for databases with a massive
dataset.

**How would it relate to CTA**: I do not believe that the CTA database needs
sharding, my point being that they are not large-scale enough. The database
doesn't need to be split and redistributed outside Chicago because they have no
users outside Chicago. Sharding should be reserved for multi-state or national
applications.

## Query optimization

In any compiled programming language, the human-readable code we write needs to
be translated into instructions that the machine can understand. Though SQL is
an interpreted language, the query optimization concept is not much different
from this approach. Query optimizer modifies the user's query in the background,
without the user's consent or knowledge, in hope that it can reach the same
conclusion using fewer resources. It is worth noting that there is always an
extra cost for this operation. However such cost &mdash; usually CPU &mdash; is
perceived to be inexpensive and written off from the balance.

**How would it relate to CTA**: Query optimization naturally relates to all
database systems because it is already turned on. It is true that some
database vendors allow some degree of control over it (e.g.: code hints). But
for the most part, sharding is available for everyone without any configuration.

## Concurrent transactions

A database server constantly communicates with multiple clients. These query
calls are often simultaneous and overlap with others. To avoid the
*double-spend* situation, the database isolates each transaction to ensure the
integrity of data. Another purpose of a secluded transaction is to offer
recoverability should an error occur. Conversely, changes within a transaction
will only take effect if it has been successfully committed. Concurrency (or
*Isolation*) is part of [ACID](https://github.com/hendraanggrian/IIT-CS425/blob/main/acid.md), which are fundamental characteristics of RDMS
transactions.

**How would it relate to CTA**: In the context of CTA, one of the most common
forms of double-spending is a ticket (or pass) being scanned more than once. Any
transaction in the CTA database would also benefit from the recoverability
feature.

## Hashing

Hashing refers to the one-way conversion of text, using hash functions, to a
randomized sequence of characters called a hash. The result is expected to be
collision-proof, that is, one text can only produce one hash and vice-versa.
Aside from the obvious security and privacy reasons, the hashes are also
favorable as they are faster to map than searching through values. Hashing is a
direct contrast to encryption, which can parse back the hash into the original
text.

**How would it relate to CTA**: Nowadays, hashing remains well-used in the CTA
database or any application. Some database vendors may have already incorporated
hashing under the hood, but there are other popular use cases such as password
hashing. It is inevitable too that any application would use a data structure
map or dictionary, which are forms of a hash table.

## Hadoop Distributed File System

The *Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)* is a file structure and rules of
operation for [Apache Hadoop](https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/r1.2.1/hdfs_design.html),
an open-source distributed framework built on top of Java. Hadoop operates by
breaking apart into clusters and balancing workloads between them, HDFS is
responsible for this task in a cluster. HDFS is designed to be fault-tolerant
with its data replication nodes, albeit partially since not all blocks all
replicated. Initially written from and for commodity hardware, Hadoop has since
found its way into enterprise servers and High-Performance Computing (HPC).

**How would it relate to CTA**: Although it is my understanding that the CTA
database would not gain full advantages by utilizing sharding, Hadoop still
proposes overall robustness and better data organization. All while being free
of financial cost as it is open-source.
